# Predicting_Athlete_Readiness
## Abstract:
The aim of this project is to answer the research question: Can force plate measurements from a countermovement jump accurately predict an athlete's performance readiness? To test this research question, Linear Discriminate Analysis, Random Forest, Receiver Operating Characteristic, and Principal Component Analysis models were built with Python in Visual Studio Code. These models used seven metrics to predict athlete readiness: Average Braking Force, Average Propulsive Power, Time to Takeoff, Left Average Braking Force, Right Average Braking Force, L|R Average Braking Force, and Peak Propulsive Power. Athlete readiness was classified by calculating the quintiles of the Jump Height values of all athletes. Overall, the results from this project demonstrate that the Hawkin Dynamics Force-Plate Countermovement Jump can predict athlete readiness with an average accuracy of 80.38% using the models outlined above. 

## Introduction:
The Hawkin Dynamics Force Plate System allows for nine different test types: Countermovement Jump, Squat Jump, Drop Jump, Countermovement Rebound Jump, Isometric Jump, Free Run, Multi Rebound Jump, Weigh-In, and Drop Landing (Hawkin Dynamics). For the purposes of this project, the focus will be on the Countermovement Jump. There are six key phases in this jump: Quiet Phase, Unweighting Phase, Braking Phase, Propulsive Phase, Flight Phase, and Landing Phase (Bell, Karah, Berberet). Each stage plays a key role in calculating and understanding an athlete’s force output, and by extension, readiness. Athlete readiness is defined as, “The current functional state of an athlete that determines the ability to effectively achieve their performance potential” (Berberet). The Linear Discriminate Analysis model predicted Athlete Readiness with a 0.735 Quadratic Weighted Kappa accuracy score. The Random Forest model’s Quadratic Weighted Kappa metric was 0.874. Principal Component Analysis was used to improve the accuracy of these models but ultimately, PCA did not improve the models, but rather made them worse by a small margin. Finally, the Multi- Class Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve’s accuracy score was 0.8025 with classes 1 and 5 performing the best with AUC values of 0.92 and 0.93, respectively. 

## Data Upload Notebook:
The goal of this script was to web scrape the Hawkin Dynamics dashboard to download the data into a csv file and turn it into a task scheduler. Since the women’s basketball team was in season during the duration of this project, the data needed to be updated weekly to maintain a current and accurate record of new jump tests. In order to do so, I consulted ChatGPT to create the script and debug errors during creation. The script starts by setting up Google Chrome’s Web Driver and specifying where the csv file will be downloaded. It then logs into my Hawkin Dynamic account, chooses the specific test type, clicks a box to deidentify the data, and specifies the format of the date column. However, the script is unable to export the tests automatically due to bot-detection software on the website. So, to export the csv file, the user must manually click the ‘export test’ button. Once that is done, a .zip file is downloaded, the csv file is unzipped, and the new csv file replaces the old csv file in the download directory specified at the beginning of the script. Due to the need for manual input and the time constraints of this project, I was unable to turn this script into a task scheduler. However, once a week I ran this script to maintain an updated version of the data. 

## Data Cleaning and Visualization Notebook:
The aim of this script was to clean and perform descriptive statistics on the data. The data used for this project comes from the Belmont University Women’s Basketball team’s countermovement jump tests from the Hawkin Dynamics Force-Plate system. The data was collected during their regular strength and conditioning sessions starting in August of 2025. There are 91 columns that specify dates, athlete identification, and all metrics stored in the force-plate system. The script starts by reading in the data from a csv file and then creates a new data frame that includes the metrics I used for this project, and athlete and test identifications. The only cleaning necessary for this dataset was to remove any null values from the original dataset. The rest of the script visualizes the distributions and relationships of variables through histograms, bar charts, count plots, scatterplots, boxplots, and a correlation matrix. 

## Linear Discriminate Analysis Notebook:
This notebook aims to use a Linear Discriminate Analysis model to predict athlete readiness based on the seven metrics outlined in the introduction. This script begins by defining athlete readiness by splitting the distribution of the ‘jump height’ data into quintiles. Based on where an athlete’s jump falls on that distribution, they are assigned a number 1-5, 1 being least ready and 5 being most ready. Quintiles were used to create an even distribution of the readiness scores. I attempted two other ways to calculate athlete readiness, but both methods created skewed distributions that resulted in low performing models. The first was based on each athlete’s average jump height for that day then calculating the percentage change from their overall average. The second was based on the athlete’s individual jumps tested. So, for each jump, that value was compared using a percentage change formula to that athlete’s overall average jump height and then assigned a score 1-5 based on that calculation. 

The script then continues by building the LDA model. First, the data is split into testing and training data based on the month the jump took place. The data was then fit to the model, and the model made its predictions. I plotted a confusion matrix to visualize what mistakes the model was making. I then calculated the model’s accuracy score using the Quadratic Weighted Kappa score. I chose this metric because it takes into account when the model made a guess close to the right answer, which allowed the score to be more representative of the model’s true accuracy. The quadratic weighted kappa score was 0.735, meaning the model accurately predicted athlete readiness 73.5% of the time.

Finally, this script creates a multi-class receiver operating characteristic curve to visualize the accuracy of the model. Each readiness classification was considered a different model and was shown as a graph of the false positive rate versus the true positive rate. Each class’s AUC values were as follows: 0.92, 0.75, 0.69, 0.72, and 0.93. Overall, the LDA model effectively predicted athlete readiness scores, with the highest accuracy for scores 1 and 5.  

## Random Forest Notebook:
The goal of this script was to test if a Random Forest model could accurately predict athlete readiness. After defining athlete readiness, the script builds the random forest classifier. The data is split into training and testing data with a 70% and 30% split, respectively. The data is then fit to the model and the model made its predictions. A confusion matrix was used to visualize where the model was making mistakes. The random forest model’s quadratic weighted kappa accuracy score was 0.8740. Meaning, the model predicted athlete readiness correct 87.4% of the time. The random forest model was then used for feature selection to understand and visualize which predictors were most important to the model. As a result, the most importance feature was ‘Peak Propulsive Power’, and the least important feature was ‘L|R Avg. Braking Force.’ This was shown through different visualizations such as a bar chart, a box plot, and a violin distribution. 

## Principal Component Analysis Notebook:
The goal of this script was to build a Principal Component Analysis model which was then to be used to improve the Linear Discriminate Analysis, Random Forest, and Receiver Operating Characteristic models. To set up the PCA model, I scaled the data, fit and transformed the model to the scaled data, then calculated both the proportion and the cumulative proportion of variance explained. Then, I graphed the linear combinations of principal component 1 and principal component 2 as a bar graph. Next, I created the Random Forest classifier using the PCA scaled data and visualized the outcome with a confusion matrix. The quadratic weighted kappa score was 0.838. Meaning, the original Random Forest model performed better than the one built using PCA. The same is true for the Linear Discriminate Analysis model. The quadratic weighted kappa score for the LDA model using PCA 0.732. Finally, I applied the PCA model data to the ROC curves and the AUC values were as follows: 0.92, 0.75, 0.70, 0.73, and 0.95. Meaning, the ROC curves improved by a small margin when using the scaled PCA data, compared to the original curves.  

## Works Cited
Bell, Karah, and Drake Berberet. “Countermovement Jump Playbook.” Hawkin Dynamics, Hawkin Dynamics, Jan. 2024, app-na1.hubspotdocuments.com/documents/4687378/view/906921190?accessId=d102df. 

Berberet, Drake. “Readiness Monitoring in the HD Mobile App.” Hawkin Dynamics, Hawkin Dynamics, 2023, app-na1.hubspotdocuments.com/documents/4687378/view/906921190?accessId=d102df. 

Dynamics, Hawkin. “Test Types.” Test Types, Hawkin Dynamics, 2024, www.hawkindynamics.com/test-types. 

 


